README.rst, before:

.. role:: raw-latex(raw)
   :format: latex
..

TYPO3 extension fh_debug
========================

Installation Requirement
------------------------

You must overwrite the TYPO3 Core file
sysext/core/Resources/PHP/GlobalDebugFunctions.php by the file
fh_debug/Patches/TYPO3/sysext/core/Resources/PHP/GlobalDebugFunctions.php.
This will bring you back the former methods debugBegin and debugEnd.
And it contains the necessary PHP code to call fh_debug if it is activated
in the Extension Manager.
Only by this fh_debug will work at all. 


What is does
------------

Use this extension to generate debug output files for the PHP code of
TYPO3 and TYPO3 extensions in the Front End or Back End if they have PHP
debug statements. Consider to also install **debug_mysql_db** if you
want to debug the generated SQL queries or track down the PHP errors in
the table **sys_log** or the Developer traces written to the TYPO3
function **devLog**.

The debug output is written into a HTML debug output file. All the
configuration is done in the Extension Manager for fh_debug. You can
design the output by the CSS file fhdebug.css. If you have a lot of
debug output then you should put debug(‘B’) (formerly debugBegin()) and
debug(‘E’) (formerly debugEnd) PHP commands around the PHP debug
commands in order to have fewer debug output lines in the file. These
commands will activate and deactivate the debug output.

force output
~~~~~~~~~~~~

Since version 0.8.3: If a debug(‘B’) is required, but maybe not active,
then you can use the third parameter (group) ‘F’ to force an output.
This is a spacial case to produce the output no matter if debugBegin is
set to be mandatory or not.

example:
~~~~~~~~

::

   debug('B');
   $a = 'myString';
   debug ($a, '$a at position 1');
   debug('E');

No debug output will be shown on the screen. Otherwise you must
deactivate the debug output in the Install Tool.

::

   $a = 'myString2';
   debug ($a, '$a at position 1', 'F');

The debug output will always be shown.

Configuration
-------------

Just enter any invalid IP address:

   [SYS][devIPmask] = 1.1.1.1

The Extension Manager configuration of fh_debug will be added to the IP
address of the Install Tool. IPADDRESS = 34.22.11.12 Your current IP
address is shown in the Extension Manager view of fh_debug below the
field IPADDRESS. If your provides has an ip version 6 activated, then
you must enter it in the IPv6 format.

.. _example-1:

example:
~~~~~~~~

   Enter your current IP address 11.12.13.14, if you want to debug this
   client’s actions.

LocalConfiguration.php:
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Use the fh_debug error handler in order to get debug messages of all
exceptions. Add these lines into your file ``LocalConfiguration.php``
under typo3conf.

::

   'SYS' => array(
      'displayErrors' => '2',
       'errorHandler' => 'JambageCom\\FhDebug\\Hooks\\ErrorHandler',
   ),

You can show more debug info and a backtrace with the TYPO3 error
message “Oops, an error occurred!”. This is activated by default:
OOPS_AN_ERROR_OCCURRED = 1 This will also add a detailed debug output to
the debug file.

To get the debug output for “Oops, an error occurred!” you must make
this configuration in the Install Tool or ``LocalConfiguration.php``:

[SYS][productionExceptionHandler] =
JambageCom:raw-latex:`\FhDebug`:raw-latex:`\Hooks`:raw-latex:`\CoreProductionExceptionHandler`

Remove this settings before you deinstall fh_debug. Otherwise you will
get this PHP error entry:

PHP Fatal error: Uncaught Error: Class
‘JambageCom:raw-latex:`\FhDebug`:raw-latex:`\Hooks`:raw-latex:`\CoreProductionExceptionHandler`’
not found in
/var/www/html/typo3_src-9.5.8/typo3/sysext/core/Classes/Utility/GeneralUtility.php:3667

The default setting is: [SYS][productionExceptionHandler] =
TYPO3:raw-latex:`\CMS`:raw-latex:`\Core`:raw-latex:`\Error`:raw-latex:`\ProductionExceptionHandler`

.. _example-2:

example:
~~~~~~~~

::

   if (\TYPO3\CMS\Core\Utility\ExtensionManagementUtility::isLoaded('fh_debug')) {
       require_once(\TYPO3\CMS\Core\Utility\ExtensionManagementUtility::extPath('fh_debug') . 'Classes/Utility/DebugFunctions.php');  // use t3lib_extMgm::extPath in TYPO3 4.5
       // some configuration:
       \JambageCom\Fhdebug\Utility\DebugFunctions::setErrorLogFile(''); // this is necessary if you use the error_log file
       // if you use the debug HTML file:
       \JambageCom\Fhdebug\Utility\DebugFunctions::setDebugFile('fileadmin/debug.html');
       
       \JambageCom\Fhdebug\Utility\DebugFunctions::setDebugBegin(FALSE);       
       \JambageCom\Fhdebug\Utility\DebugFunctions::setRecursiveDepth('12'); 
       \JambageCom\Fhdebug\Utility\DebugFunctions::setTraceDepth('12'); 
       \JambageCom\Fhdebug\Utility\DebugFunctions::setAppendDepth('0'); 
       \JambageCom\Fhdebug\Utility\DebugFunctions::setTypo3Mode('ALL'); 
       \JambageCom\Fhdebug\Utility\DebugFunctions::setActive(TRUE); 
       \JambageCom\Fhdebug\Utility\DebugFunctions::initFile();
   }

   \JambageCom\Fhdebug\Utility\DebugFunctions::debug($_EXTCONF, '$_EXTCONF');

If you use the file **ext_localconf.php** or some of the at first
executed TYPO3 core files, then the extension fh_debug has not been
initialized yet. Therefore you must use the full namespace class to
initialize and to call the class of fh_debug.

Class
‘JambageCom:raw-latex:`\Fhdebug`:raw-latex:`\Utility`:raw-latex:`\DebugFunctions`’
not found in
/var/www/html/typo3_src/typo3/sysext/core/Resources/PHP/GlobalDebugFunctions.php
line 15

This means that your debug output shall be generated before the
extension fh_debug has been initialized by TYPO3. You must do your own
initialization by these commands:

.. _example-3:

example:
~~~~~~~~

::

   define('FH_DEBUG_EXT', 'fh_debug');
   require_once(\TYPO3\CMS\Core\Utility\ExtensionManagementUtility::extPath('fh_debug') . 'Classes/Utility/DebugFunctions.php');
   \JambageCom\Fhdebug\Utility\DebugFunctions::init();
   \JambageCom\Fhdebug\Utility\DebugFunctions::setErrorLogFile('');
   \JambageCom\Fhdebug\Utility\DebugFunctions::setDebugFile('fileadmin/debug.html');

   debug ($tmp, 'variable before fh_debug has been started yet.');

debug begin and end
-------------------

There are 2 control commands available to begin and to end the
generation of debug output: debug(‘B’) and debug(‘E’), formerly (before
TYPO3 9.5) debugBegin and debugEnd .


Replacement for the functions debugBegin and debugEnd: 
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
Since fh_debug 0.8.0 a
workaround has been introduced because since TYPO3 9 needed global
functions have been removed.

.. _example-4:

example:
~~~~~~~~

::

   debug('B'); // begin debugging
   debug($myVariable, 'my variable');
   debug('E'); // end debugging

example before version 0.8.0:
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

::

   debugBegin();
   debug($myVariable, 'my variabled');
   debugEnd();

Error
-----

If fh_debug does not work, then there is probably the case where
fh_debug has not been activated yet. You can use PHP error logging as an
alternativ.

example PHP error_log :
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

::

   error_log('mymethod Position 2 $variableName: ' .  print_r($variableName, true) . PHP_EOL, 3, '/var/www/html/fileadmin/phpDebugErrorLog.txt');

Use you own path as the last parameter of the above method error_log

Trouble shooting
----------------

If you do not get anything shown in the browser url
https://example.com/fileadmin/debug.html, then make sure that this file
debug.html really exists on the file system. If not, then create an
empty file debug.html in the folder fileadmin and give Apache write
access to it.

Check the configuration in the extension manager. IP addresses of the
client browser Put in an asterisk \* . Then every client IP address will
produce a debug output.

Improvements
------------

Please make an entry directly on the TYPO3 Core bug tracker at `add a
control function for debugging <https://forge.typo3.org/issues/23899>`__
`enhanced debug methods <https://forge.typo3.org/issues/86220>`__

Global functions can only be implemented in the TYPO3 core.

ToDO
----

Use cweagans/composer-patches .

Commit message:

add hint about composer post-autoload-dump

README.rst, after:

.. role:: raw-latex(raw)
   :format: latex
..

TYPO3 extension fh_debug
========================

Installation Requirement
------------------------

You must overwrite the TYPO3 Core file
sysext/core/Resources/PHP/GlobalDebugFunctions.php by the file
fh_debug/Patches/TYPO3/sysext/core/Resources/PHP/GlobalDebugFunctions.php.
Alternatively you can use "post-autoload-dump" and a file copy method in your composer.json.
See `t3o <https://getcomposer.org/doc/articles/scripts.md#defining-scripts>`__ .

This will bring you back the former methods debugBegin and debugEnd.
And it contains the necessary PHP code to call fh_debug if it is activated
in the Extension Manager.
Only by this fh_debug will work at all. 


What is does
------------

Use this extension to generate debug output files for the PHP code of
TYPO3 and TYPO3 extensions in the Front End or Back End if they have PHP
debug statements. Consider to also install **debug_mysql_db** if you
want to debug the generated SQL queries or track down the PHP errors in
the table **sys_log** or the Developer traces written to the TYPO3
function **devLog**.

The debug output is written into a HTML debug output file. All the
configuration is done in the Extension Manager for fh_debug. You can
design the output by the CSS file fhdebug.css. If you have a lot of
debug output then you should put debug(‘B’) (formerly debugBegin()) and
debug(‘E’) (formerly debugEnd) PHP commands around the PHP debug
commands in order to have fewer debug output lines in the file. These
commands will activate and deactivate the debug output.

force output
~~~~~~~~~~~~

Since version 0.8.3: If a debug(‘B’) is required, but maybe not active,
then you can use the third parameter (group) ‘F’ to force an output.
This is a spacial case to produce the output no matter if debugBegin is
set to be mandatory or not.

example:
~~~~~~~~

::

   debug('B');
   $a = 'myString';
   debug ($a, '$a at position 1');
   debug('E');

No debug output will be shown on the screen. Otherwise you must
deactivate the debug output in the Install Tool.

::

   $a = 'myString2';
   debug ($a, '$a at position 1', 'F');

The debug output will always be shown.

Configuration
-------------

Just enter any invalid IP address:

   [SYS][devIPmask] = 1.1.1.1

The Extension Manager configuration of fh_debug will be added to the IP
address of the Install Tool. IPADDRESS = 34.22.11.12 Your current IP
address is shown in the Extension Manager view of fh_debug below the
field IPADDRESS. If your provides has an ip version 6 activated, then
you must enter it in the IPv6 format.

.. _example-1:

example:
~~~~~~~~

   Enter your current IP address 11.12.13.14, if you want to debug this
   client’s actions.

LocalConfiguration.php:
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Use the fh_debug error handler in order to get debug messages of all
exceptions. Add these lines into your file ``LocalConfiguration.php``
under typo3conf.

::

   'SYS' => array(
      'displayErrors' => '2',
       'errorHandler' => 'JambageCom\\FhDebug\\Hooks\\ErrorHandler',
   ),

You can show more debug info and a backtrace with the TYPO3 error
message “Oops, an error occurred!”. This is activated by default:
OOPS_AN_ERROR_OCCURRED = 1 This will also add a detailed debug output to
the debug file.

To get the debug output for “Oops, an error occurred!” you must make
this configuration in the Install Tool or ``LocalConfiguration.php``:

[SYS][productionExceptionHandler] =
JambageCom:raw-latex:`\FhDebug`:raw-latex:`\Hooks`:raw-latex:`\CoreProductionExceptionHandler`

Remove this settings before you deinstall fh_debug. Otherwise you will
get this PHP error entry:

PHP Fatal error: Uncaught Error: Class
‘JambageCom:raw-latex:`\FhDebug`:raw-latex:`\Hooks`:raw-latex:`\CoreProductionExceptionHandler`’
not found in
/var/www/html/typo3_src-9.5.8/typo3/sysext/core/Classes/Utility/GeneralUtility.php:3667

The default setting is: [SYS][productionExceptionHandler] =
TYPO3:raw-latex:`\CMS`:raw-latex:`\Core`:raw-latex:`\Error`:raw-latex:`\ProductionExceptionHandler`

.. _example-2:

example:
~~~~~~~~

::

   if (\TYPO3\CMS\Core\Utility\ExtensionManagementUtility::isLoaded('fh_debug')) {
       require_once(\TYPO3\CMS\Core\Utility\ExtensionManagementUtility::extPath('fh_debug') . 'Classes/Utility/DebugFunctions.php');  // use t3lib_extMgm::extPath in TYPO3 4.5
       // some configuration:
       \JambageCom\Fhdebug\Utility\DebugFunctions::setErrorLogFile(''); // this is necessary if you use the error_log file
       // if you use the debug HTML file:
       \JambageCom\Fhdebug\Utility\DebugFunctions::setDebugFile('fileadmin/debug.html');
       
       \JambageCom\Fhdebug\Utility\DebugFunctions::setDebugBegin(FALSE);       
       \JambageCom\Fhdebug\Utility\DebugFunctions::setRecursiveDepth('12'); 
       \JambageCom\Fhdebug\Utility\DebugFunctions::setTraceDepth('12'); 
       \JambageCom\Fhdebug\Utility\DebugFunctions::setAppendDepth('0'); 
       \JambageCom\Fhdebug\Utility\DebugFunctions::setTypo3Mode('ALL'); 
       \JambageCom\Fhdebug\Utility\DebugFunctions::setActive(TRUE); 
       \JambageCom\Fhdebug\Utility\DebugFunctions::initFile();
   }

   \JambageCom\Fhdebug\Utility\DebugFunctions::debug($_EXTCONF, '$_EXTCONF');

If you use the file **ext_localconf.php** or some of the at first
executed TYPO3 core files, then the extension fh_debug has not been
initialized yet. Therefore you must use the full namespace class to
initialize and to call the class of fh_debug.

Class
‘JambageCom:raw-latex:`\Fhdebug`:raw-latex:`\Utility`:raw-latex:`\DebugFunctions`’
not found in
/var/www/html/typo3_src/typo3/sysext/core/Resources/PHP/GlobalDebugFunctions.php
line 15

This means that your debug output shall be generated before the
extension fh_debug has been initialized by TYPO3. You must do your own
initialization by these commands:

.. _example-3:

example:
~~~~~~~~

::

   define('FH_DEBUG_EXT', 'fh_debug');
   require_once(\TYPO3\CMS\Core\Utility\ExtensionManagementUtility::extPath('fh_debug') . 'Classes/Utility/DebugFunctions.php');
   \JambageCom\Fhdebug\Utility\DebugFunctions::init();
   \JambageCom\Fhdebug\Utility\DebugFunctions::setErrorLogFile('');
   \JambageCom\Fhdebug\Utility\DebugFunctions::setDebugFile('fileadmin/debug.html');

   debug ($tmp, 'variable before fh_debug has been started yet.');

debug begin and end
-------------------

There are 2 control commands available to begin and to end the
generation of debug output: debug(‘B’) and debug(‘E’), formerly (before
TYPO3 9.5) debugBegin and debugEnd .


Replacement for the functions debugBegin and debugEnd: 
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
Since fh_debug 0.8.0 a
workaround has been introduced because since TYPO3 9 needed global
functions have been removed.

.. _example-4:

example:
~~~~~~~~

::

   debug('B'); // begin debugging
   debug($myVariable, 'my variable');
   debug('E'); // end debugging

example before version 0.8.0:
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

::

   debugBegin();
   debug($myVariable, 'my variabled');
   debugEnd();

Error
-----

If fh_debug does not work, then there is probably the case where
fh_debug has not been activated yet. You can use PHP error logging as an
alternativ.

example PHP error_log :
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

::

   error_log('mymethod Position 2 $variableName: ' .  print_r($variableName, true) . PHP_EOL, 3, '/var/www/html/fileadmin/phpDebugErrorLog.txt');

Use you own path as the last parameter of the above method error_log

Trouble shooting
----------------

If you do not get anything shown in the browser url
https://example.com/fileadmin/debug.html, then make sure that this file
debug.html really exists on the file system. If not, then create an
empty file debug.html in the folder fileadmin and give Apache write
access to it.

Check the configuration in the extension manager. IP addresses of the
client browser Put in an asterisk \* . Then every client IP address will
produce a debug output.

Improvements
------------

Please make an entry directly on the TYPO3 Core bug tracker at `add a
control function for debugging <https://forge.typo3.org/issues/23899>`__
`enhanced debug methods <https://forge.typo3.org/issues/86220>`__

Global functions can only be implemented in the TYPO3 core.

ToDO
----

Use cweagans/composer-patches .
